- Metadata::
    - Tags:: #[[翻译]]
    - Source:: #[[Effective Note-Taking]]
    - 校对: #Alex
- 
- Hi,
- Let's talk a bit more about navigating around Roam. At a high level, you can view all your pages with the **All Pages** link. Plus, there's the **Graph Overview**. Clicking a node in the graph highlights the connections. Double-clicking will take you to the page.
- **Search Bar**
- There's also the Search bar where you can start typing to find pages or blocks with the words you're looking for. Exact word and phrase matches will be highlighted. Searching for multiple words will filter to only those which contain all the words. And if nothing matches, you have the option to create a new page with those words. Command-U is your keyboard shortcut to the search bar.
- **Starred pages or shortcuts**
- For pages which you often visit, when you're on that page, you can click the Star icon to add the page to your shortcuts. It will then show up in the Shortcuts section on the left-hand side. Clicking the star again will remove it. You can re-order any starred pages in the shortcuts area, just by dragging and dropping them around.
- **Outlining**
- Let's take a quick step back. Chances are you've already played around with the outlining in Roam but let's cover it in more detail. Blocks can be infinitely nested. You indent a block by hitting Tab and unindent by using Shift-Tab. You can also do this and move blocks around with your mouse by grabbing the bullet itself with a left-click and dragging it to the new location. The insertion line that appears will show you where it'll end up when you let go of the mouse button. You'll see the length of the line grow and shrink as you move it in and out of the indented levels.
- **Editing**
- One thing that may be a little less obvious is that really there are two modes: an editing mode and a selection mode. Editing is when you have a blinking cursor, and you're entering text, etc. in a block. Pressing enter will leave that block and create a new one below. And you'll be editing that one; pretty intuitive. Alternatively, you can hit Escape instead of Enter. This will put you in selection mode, and the block you were editing will be selected. When you leave editing mode in a block, you'll see the markdown that you wrote converted into its visual form, where you can then click links to navigate around.
- **Selection**
- When you have a block selected, you can use Shift and up and down arrows to add more blocks to the selection. You can use the mouse to grab all the selected blocks to move them en-masse elsewhere. You can also use Tab and Shift-Tab to indent or unindent all the blocks. Or Delete, and Backspace will delete the blocks. There's no prompting when you remove a block or blocks, but you can undo your mistakes with Command-Z (on Macs) and Control-Z (for Windows). To redo, Command-Shift-Z or Control-Shift-Z respectively. At the time I'm writing this when you have a single block selected, you can move it up and down using Command-Shift-Up and Command-Shift-Down to move them. Unfortunately, you can't (yet) do this with multiple blocks. I hope that is coming in the future.
- **Folding and Zooming**
- To help manage your focus when you are writing, you can use the folding and zooming features. Clicking on a block's bullet will __Zoom__ you into that block, and it's children. You'll see a breadcrumb trail above so you can navigate back out. This is also known as __"Focus on this block"__, which you'll see if you right-click the bullet. Similarly, you can collapse and expand the blocks using the disclosure triangles that appear when you hover by a block bullet that has child elements. For both functions, when you are in editing mode, there are keyboard shortcuts. To Zoom in and out, you can use Command-Period and Command-Comma respectively. To fold, when your cursor is in a block with child elements, you can use Command-Up and Command-Down to collapse and expand them.
- **Headings**
- In yesterday's lesson, I intentionally left out headings when we talked about formatting. Headings tend to make more sense in conjunction with the outlining features. You can turn any block into one of three heading styles, either using the right-click menu and choosing, H1, H2, or H3, or you can use the keyboard shortcut, Command-Alt-1 for H1. Replace the 1 with a 2 or 3 for the other headings. You can revert to standard text using Command-Alt-0.
- **Document mode**
- If you want your page to look more like a typical note page, you can right-click on the page title and choose __View as Document__. It hides the bullets for each block until you hover over the block with your mouse, but retains the indenting. Roam's functionality is unchanged. If you select all the text to copy and paste it elsewhere, you'll notice that you don't get the bullets included, but the rest of the markdown syntax is intact. Right-click again on the page title, to set it back to a bulleted list. You can also choose numbered lists. You can switch between these modes at the block-level too, by right-clicking on the blocks bullet.
- **Navigation keyboard shortcuts**
- There are a few more "advanced" keyboard shortcuts you can use when you're in editing mode. If your cursor is within a page reference or a block reference you can hit Control-O to navigate to that page. Control-O anywhere else in the block will __Zoom__ you into that block as discussed above. Holding Shift when clicking on a page or block reference, or pressing Control-Shift-O will open the page or block reference in the Sidebar. You can also do similar with the search results when you're using the search bar. When you're in the search, you can use the up and down arrow keys to move through the results. Hit Enter to open the page. Use Shift-Enter to open it in the Sidebar. Or you can hold Shift while clicking to open it in the Sidebar too.
- In tomorrow's lesson, we'll be covering the **Sidebar** in much more detail.
- If you have any feedback or a burning question you'd like answered, feel free to reply to this email. I'll do my best to respond and incorporate it into revised versions and future lessons.
- Until tomorrow,
- Andy
