
# Backlinks
## [Ethereum Whitepaper](<Ethereum Whitepaper.md>)
- Once step (1) has taken place, after a few minutes some miner will include the transaction in a block, say block number 270. After about one hour, five more blocks will have been added to the chain after that block, with each of those blocks indirectly pointing to the transaction and thus "confirming" it. At this point, the merchant will accept the payment as finalized and deliver the product; since we are assuming this is a digital good, delivery is instant. Now, the attacker creates another transaction sending the 100 BTC to himself. If the attacker simply releases it into the wild, the transaction will not be processed; miners will attempt to run `APPLY(S,TX)` and notice that `TX` consumes a UTXO which is no longer in the state. So instead, the attacker creates a "[fork](<fork.md>)" of the blockchain, starting by mining another version of block 270 pointing to the same block 269 as a parent but with the new transaction in place of the old one. Because the block data is different, this requires redoing the proof of work. Furthermore, the attacker's new version of block 270 has a different hash, so the original blocks 271 to 275 do not "point" to it; thus, the original chain and the attacker's new chain are completely separate. The rule is that in a fork the longest blockchain is taken to be the truth, and so legitimate miners will work on the 275 chain while the attacker alone is working on the 270 chain. In order for the attacker to make his blockchain the longest, he would need to have more computational power than the rest of the network combined in order to catch up (hence, "[51% attack](<51% attack.md>)"

