- 推荐内容[3]
    - 1.
    - 2.
    - 3.
- 动态整理[3]----展开是原文内容
    7月2日，Conor连续发了几条推文，从中可以感受到他对于Roam用户的期待是：包容、开放、多元背景。他也很直白的提到，如果你不能和这些人共事，那么Roamresearch不适合你使用。Roam拒绝“封闭”的用户
        We're still a very small team at Roam, but I'm super proud that we've built an incredibly high trust and genuinely loving environment with people from very diverse backgrounds, cultures, sexual orientations, political and religious beliefs.
        Some of the character traits we really respect are curiosity, grit, openness, and desire to work closely on a shared mission with people who've had very different life experiences.
        If you aren't ok working with people whose family members have been deported, with queer people, atheists, feminists, people who care deeply about social justice, AND evangelical Christians, AND red state Republicans, AND heretics of all stripes...

[@Roamresearch](https://twitter.com/RoamResearch)is not for you.
        We've got very low tolerance for people with very low tolerance. 

If you can tolerate anything except the "outgroup," our stance is that that counts as being very low tolerance.
    Conor承认愿景(增强个人和集体智慧)的困难性，“I am worried our mission is already too big”
        And here I am worried our mission is already too big
        Augmenting individual and collective intelligence is pretty big mission I'd say.
        And yes - we are still learning as a company and as individuals how to translate these values into specific contexts like interviewing and outbound recruiting, and sometimes in our attempt to live our values, we don't always convey the perceptions we intend.
    Conor表示他个人使得自己尊敬、珍视的一些人“upset”，似乎是让他们感到像是“outsider”。自己过去招募设计师的时候试图去了解他们面对道德困境时的选择
        It does make me sad to learn that I personally upset some people I reached out to to see about bringing onto our team in the past, people whose work I respect, and whose opinions I value.

I know what it's like to feel like an outsider, did not intend to make others feel same way
        When recruiting someone to potentially lead design at Roam, I've in the past try to get insight into how they'd deal with hardest moral challenges I expect we'll face.

Especially when they're someone I think might be at the helm for designing multiplayer.
